In Crete, the main stronghold of Mycenaean culture away from the Greek peninsula, our understanding of early Greek speakers is rather more complicated. Long before the Mycenaeans had begun building their palace complexes on the Greek mainland, a people whose name we do not know, but whom we conventionally call Minoans after the mythical king Minos of Crete, had established a similar civilization on his island. Crete played a dominant role in the Aegean and exerted a cultural and possibly political influence on the Mycenaeans. The classical historian Thucydides may not have been far wrong when he claimed that Minos “was the first person to organise a navy. He controlled the greater part of what is now called the Hellenic Sea. He ruled over the Cyclades, in most of which he founded the first colonies.” This sentence underlies the scholarly theory that the Minoans actually ran a thalassocracy, or political system dependent on their domination of the sea (thalassa). Minoan civilization reached its apex in the two and a half centuries between 1700 and about 1450 BC. The ethnicity of the Minoans is disputed. They spoke another language altogether and it was almost certainly not Indo-European. They also used writing, a syllabic script known as Linear A, but this has not yet been satisfactorily deciphered or translated. Although the palace at Knossos excavated by Sir Arthur Evans in the first years of the twentieth century is by far the most famous, there are several other important Minoan palaces and building complexes on Crete, mostly around the coast of the eastern half. They include Phaistos (the second largest) and Gournia, excavated by two American archaeologists, Harriet Boyd Hawes and Edith H. Hall, between 1901 and 1904. The Minoans also settled on smaller islands, mostly near Crete, including Thera (now known as Santorini). In the mid-fifteenth century BC, however, the Minoan palaces were destroyed by fire. The chronology is much disputed. There are complications caused by the evidence for more than one catastrophic volcanic eruption on Thera, possibly resulting in tidal waves that engulfed the coast of the Cretan mainland. The fires may have been connected with the volcanic eruptions; on the other hand, they may have been caused, aggravated, or exploited by aggressive invaders. Most of the palaces were rebuilt. But one thing is certain: Soon after the fires, the script in which the palace inventories were recorded changed from Linear A to Linear B. Greek speakers, very likely from the Mycenaean palaces of the mainland, had taken over the administration of Minoan Crete. Thucydides suggests that the Mycenaean empire had indeed had a large navy in the late Bronze Age, at the time when he thought it was ruled by the Agamemnon who sailed to Troy.
