Life was changing fast for the Greeks of the eighth century BC. They explored farther afield and traded with distant peoples, opening up ever-more remote horizons. In their homeland, the sparse and scattered coastal and island settlements of the centuries since the collapse of the Mycenaeans waged war on one another. They began to become more centralized into city-states and to hold regular meetings at shared religious centers, such as the sanctuary of their supreme god, Zeus, at Olympia. But there was a crucial additional development, related to the Greeks’ inherent distrust of authority. In some Greek city-states a radical new idea emerged of the free male who was fundamentally equal in status to his peers, even if he possessed no inherited wealth or aristocratic identity whatsoever. The free Greek man was able to call, moreover, upon men of the same status to show solidarity with him in defense of his rights and privileges. By the late sixth century this vision of the ideal citizen of the polis (city-state) was to lead, after grueling struggles, to democracy. These tendencies—expansion abroad, centralization at home, conflict between social and economic classes—were in some ways contradictory. Yet they collectively resulted in the creation of an ethnic identity based on those fundamental aspects of life that any one Greek speaker intuitively felt he shared with any other, despite remoteness of residence or disparity in wealth and status. They included the cherished ideal of individual self-sufficiency, often by making a living from a small farm. It went in tandem with competitive values and a distinctive pride in the independence of the free individual. Men with this outlook were clear-eyed about the inevitability of conflict between rich and poor, those privileged by heredity and those who had to win wealth and respect by simply being excellent at what they did. This value system was in turn tied to the ideal of political autonomy for individuals and communities, who, however, subscribed to a joint set of practices agreed on by Greeks everywhere. In the fifth century, these are defined by Herodotus’s Athenians as sharing a genealogy, language, ritual sacrifices, and nomoi—laws or customs, agreed-upon rules of conduct, taboos and imperatives, such as the protection of vulnerable people conducting embassies, and rights of the dead to burial.The outlook of the Greeks of this era is crystallized in the earliest Greek literature: four long poems. They are the Iliad and the Odyssey, epic narratives that have come down to us under the name of Homer, and Hesiod’s Works and Days and Theogony. The rebellious, independent element of the Greek character is fundamental to all of them.
