Scholars are unsure about how much Greek medical knowledge came from the Egyptians. Greek doctors admired Egyptian skills in making medicines and knew that Persian kings hired Egyptian doctors. They also adopted a key practice from Egypt called incubation, which means "sleeping over" in the temple of a healing god. But the Greeks combined this with their own curious and human-focused way of solving problems. This blend created the rational, scientific approach of Hippocrates and his followers.

One important idea developed by Greek doctors was the concept of likelihood. With a set of symptoms, doctors could diagnose a patient, saying it was likely that the patient had a certain condition. They could also predict what might happen next to the patient, giving a prognosis. Hippocrates thought it was a doctor's duty to do this. Around the same time, Greeks started using arguments based on probability in other areas, like legal trials. Characters in the Iliad and the Odyssey do not use arguments from probability. The first example is in the Hymn to Hermes, probably from the sixth century BC. In the story, Hermes is a newborn baby who steals a herd of cattle from his brother Apollo. When Hermes is brought to trial before his father Zeus, he lies and says that as a baby, he wouldn't have the strength to drive cattle. Hippocrates used probability more helpfully—doctors should use evidence from their experience to predict what is likely to happen to a patient. For example, he noted, "those who are constitutionally obese are more likely to die quickly than those who are slender."

The relationship between Hippocratic medicine and other intellectual pursuits in Ionia went both ways. New archaeological evidence shows that advanced head surgery was performed on a thirty-year-old woman at Abdera, a colony of Clazomenae, one of the cities of the original Ionian League, in the mid-seventh century BC. The surgery was successful—she lived for another twenty years. This discovery, made during excavations at Abdera, reveals that complex skull surgeries, including trepanation (removing a piece of bone to take out harmful bone splinters), were done more than 200 years before the Hippocratic treatise On Head Wounds was written around 400 BC. This means that medicine was more advanced than previously thought, even before Thales and other Ionian philosophers. Aristotle, both a scientist and a philosopher, was the son of a prominent doctor, and he believed strongly in the connection between medicine and philosophy.